#### Academic Study of the direct source

- How do we create (understand? construct?) something we can barely define?
- How do we select a time period to focus on? Should we pick, say the Iron age, and, is avoiding Roman era religion valid? Ancients often willingly romanised their religion should we accept those decisions? Maybe this is a totally invalid concept, the period we should focus on is now. Reaching back to the past for purposes of religious revitalization is not a new concept, we should study other attempts.
- How do we stay up to date with modern theory? We need to be prepared to fundamentally change our beliefs and practices as new evidence comes to light. Or do we? Is this at the core of what "Recon" is?
- Must assess epistemological knowledge, orders of evidence, knowledge, are there orders of knowledge, surely truth or false? Not half truth, ⅔ truth.** <-- better described as an ontology, simplicity and greater verifiability is the base and sources that are inately less verifiable as 'truths' are higher up, the idea of the truth of a source is iffy, no one truth can be ever achieved, but maybe the idea of multiple truths, just a scale of likelihood and verifiability. 

You might have:

Material (Archaeology) - A level of interpretation, but highly verifiable, if you say a roman temple was built, you can just see the material remains of the roman temple. of course this does get more complex, but at it's simplest it is the simplest.

Written Statements - Inscriptions, Histories, Ethnologies, could be further categorised within genres, but you have a category of texts saying what people do or did, the former being simpler. Harder to verify but can be done and we can arrive at a 'truth' of the source, e.g. in an ethnology such as Germania, some practices may be shown to be true in the material record, but some can be shown to be false and can be interpreted in other ways.

Literature - Very hard to even get at what would be verified or considered a truth, but still valuable, interpret within the framework of simpler ontologies, read Aeneid in the context of Roman material culture, legal frameworks, and legendary histories