Before Hutton begins his investigation of Mother Earth, he entreat us to a basic outline that will allow us to identify the figure going forward; Mother Earth is a 'mighty female being' whom represents the 'whole of the natural world' and functions as a 'mediatrix' between heaven and earth, and thus a greater divinity than herself and human beings. At first, such terms as 'mighty female being' seem deliberately ambiguous, as if one is hedging their bets, so to speak. But, the language Hutton uses here *is descriptive*, but in a way so as to remain agnostic to the religious context. As we will so, this kind of language will become increasingly important.

Hutton structures his account of Mother Earth so that it follows a chronological order, beginning with the ancient world, and ending in the later twentieth century. He also seems to move from the more concrete to the abstract in religious terms, that is he begins by discussing some of the cultic realities of ancient goddesses. He shows that many could be associated with landscapes, such as Athens, Phrygia, or the mountains and desserts of Mesopotamia, but only the Greek Gaia and Roman Terra Mater truly approximate the later Mother Earth as Hutton has defined her, but in Hutton's own estimation there is a problem here. Gaia and Terra Mater seem to have had at best, received a truly marginal cult, Gaia at least seems to have received libation as a minor part of the worship of her son Zeus, but Terra Mater seems to have had no temples, shrines, or even statuary anywhere in the Roman Empire. 

The reason for this seems to be that a series of Goddesses existed who had much more specific and practical roles that played important roles in the lives of ancient peoples, thus cult developed around them which did not around Gaia or Terrus Mater. As an example Hutton provides Tellus who quickens the fertility of cultivated soil, who in worship was paired with the grain Goddess Ceres.

From this point Hutton moves into the literary sphere, he points how, despite an a marginal existence in cult spaces, they could go on to garner importance as symbolic and allegorical figures. The majority of references to Gaia we have come from Homer, Hesiod, or the Orphic hymns, and in Apuleius' '*The Golden Ass*', the Goddess Isis is represented as *being nature*, *mother of all*, *mistress of the elements*. This he suggests may have had a connection with the mystery cult dedicated to Isis which had gained popularity at the time, but Hutton does not continue this line of enquiry and leaves us wondering what the relationship between text and cult may be.

Hutton then focuses on the more abstract instances of Mother Nature in the Ancient world through the writings of the Greek and Roman philosophers. He brings up the Greek Physis, which to Aristotle was the power which animated living things and fashioned the elements of the world. This Physis could be connected with the Platonic world soul, which acted as a mediator between the ideal realm of the Demiurge and the material world, ordering it to implement the plans of the Demiurge.

From here Hutton descends back down from the abstract to the concrete, he points out that Physis was translated into Latin as Natura, from where it entered into Ovid and Lucretius' works as divine creator force. Aristotle's Physis would go on to enter into Orphic hymns, addressed as a deity alongside Gods and Goddesses with long established cults, suggesting that Physis, as the divine creator and ruler of the natural world had finally begun to develop a cult in a later period of the Roman Empire. From here, Hutton leaves the Ancient world and looks at the transitionary period between Antiquity and the Medieval world. 

It is important to first re-cap where Mother Nature had gotten to in the Ancient world, or I should say where sh had not gotten to. Because as Hutton portrays it there was no distinct or dominant Mother Nature, but rather a maelstrom of interconnected figures representing value to different sections of society through cult worship, literature, or as a philosophical concept. Nothing yet had really solidified into Mother Nature. This is important to remember because it seems to be the central thesis of Hutton's next section that a combination of the importance Physis and Natura had garnered in classical learning *and* the lack of any distinct cult, that would allow her to fill, as Hutton puts it 'a conceptual gap within the Christian cosmos so neatly'.

Hutton presents to us three ways in which Mother Nature made a transition from Antiquity to the Medieval world. One route that Hutton presents is through the anonymous Latin poem '*Praecatio terrae Matris*', a poem which eulogises fertile land as a divine goddess, using the term 'Mother Nature'. Somehow this poem became incorporated into early Medieval medical texts, being spread across the continent and Britain as late as the eleventh or twelfth century. In this context the poem took on a practical purpose, being used as a charm to use when collecting medicinal plants. 

A second, and more literary, is through early Christian polemics. Hutton argues that these Christian authors, debating their Pagan contemporaries' conception of the natural world, wanted to assert that God had created the natural world and governed it ever after as his servant. In doing so, they tended to personify Nature as an animate feminine being, providing a model that later authors could use to imagine Mother Nature.

The third, and in my estimation, the most important is through the body of classical philosophy that these authors inherited. We should remember, that Christianity did not develop *ex nihilo*, it is a religion of the Roman world through-and-through. That being so, classical learning continued to be a qualification for entry into the social elite, and studied enthusiastically. Because of this, Christian authors were obliged to consider the Physis or Natura of earlier philosophers, and what role she might play in a Christian cosmos.

One of the most influential authors to consider Mother Nature in the form of the Latin Natura, at this time was Augustine of Hippo. He declared that the natural world to be a teacher and guide to humanity, appointed by God to carry out his will. He apparently was unsure whether nature should be considered an animate being though, at first he endorsed the idea, but then withdrew it without condemning his former position. In Hutton's estimation this provided a path whereby the orthodox could justify belief in an animate Nature who operates as the servant of God.  







**Old**

Taking Mother Earth as an example, Hutton presents her as a Goddess who was known in antiquity, but had only modest cult attached to herself. Mother Earth or Nature's main popularity was with an educated elite, at first philosophers, such as the *Physis* of Aristotle. She went on to become popular with poets such as Ovid, Lucretius, Claudian, and Apuleius, who in his *The Golden Ass* makes Isis introduce herself as '*nature, mother of all, mistress of the elements*'. 

*A critique you could make of Hutton is, is that he (not unfairly) conflates depictions of Mother Earth and Nature. All it takes is one look at the range of deities that the Romans had which might fit into the category of 'Mother Earth' or 'Nature' to realise that these figures can not easily be bundled together; Tellus Mater, Ceres, Proserpina, Flora, Pomona, and Feronia. Though I am not sure this effects Hutton's argument.*

> Roman poets of the imperial period subsequently picked up the concept of nature as a cosmic power ... pg. 44

Importantly, for her transition to the Medieval period, Augustine of Hippo declared the natural world to be a teacher and guide to humanity, appointed by God, he however was on the fence about whether she should be considered an animate personified being. Hutton then focuses on an anonymous Latin poem *Praecatio terrae matris* ('Prayer to Mother Earth'), composed towards the end of the Western Roman Empire, which was then preserved incorporated into Early Medieval medical works and charms, which was purportedly used as a prayer before collecting herbs. Hutton also makes the convincing suggestion that this work was the inspiration for the Old English *Aecerbot* poem. 

> It was glossed in the earliest extant of these, from the sixth century, as 'the beginning of the prayer to earth employed by the pagans of old when they wished to collect herbs' pg. 46

Hutton then goes on to show how Medieval authors would make Mother Earth a divine being who is responsible for fashioning and managing the material realm on behalf of God, but none the less seems to have her own agency and appears in Medieval Romances. 

> "Even in the single case in which one was brought safely and respectably into Christian cosmology - that of Nature - the responsibility allotted to her was still considerable, with much day-to-day freedom of action. pg. 196"

The Early Modern authors however seemed to have been influenced by the resurgence of Plato in Western Europe, occultist English authors of the Jacobean period made Mother Earth, as Isis the world soul connecting earth to heaven via a chain. This interest would only increase with the Romantic Movement, with poets such as Percy Shelley, John Keats, Charlotte Bronte, and Robert Browning. But, the most dramatic representation of this period was when the French Revolutionary Government briefly instituted a national cult of Nature to replace Christianity in 1773. The final phase of Mother Natures development sees her completely separate from Christian Theology with the various Mother Goddess theories that ran rampant in the late 19th and through the 20th century. This was a craze that we very much still feel today reflected in various modern Pagan movements like Wiccanism and New Age movements.